Hello, I'm Allan Schaffehr,
the game technologies
evangelist at Apple.
Last year with iOS 4.1,
we introduced Game Center,
Apple's new social gaming network.
Game Center enables the players
in your games to track their
best scores on a leaderboard,
to compare their achievements,
invite friends to play the game,
and to start a multiplayer
game through auto-matching.
So in this presentation,
I'll cover just the
essentials of Game Center:
authentication, leaderboards,
and achievements,
and the approach that you can use to
integrate these features into your game.
So let's get started.
So as I said,
Game Center lets your game take
part in an online social network
provided with iOS 4.1 and above.
It allows your players to post
their scores and achievements
to our online leaderboards,
and you can integrate achievements
to reward the player as they
make progress through your game.
We also take your game and make it
multiplayer so that your players
can compete and communicate with
each other online in real time.
And there's a lot we do to help you with
the promotion and discovery of your game.
There's special badging on the
App Store and a special area
where we feature games using
Game Center and their new releases.
Now, the functionality of Game Center is
delivered in these three parts.
The first is the Game Center app
built into the OS.
And this is the central starting
point where your users will create an
account and sign into Game Center and
then can interact with other players.
They can set a status message,
invite other players to be their friends,
and then see what games their
friends have played recently,
and compare their achievements and
best scores with other players.
They can also invite their friends to
play a game and start a multiplayer
game through auto-matching.
The second piece is
the Game Kit framework.
And this is what allows game
developers to create apps that are
going to work with Game Center.
So this is where
authentication is handled,
new friend management,
reporting and displaying scores,
unlocking achievements,
and multiplayer functionality, and so on.
And then the third piece
is the Game Center service.
So this is an online service provided by
Apple to perform player authentication,
provide leaderboard and
achievement data to your game,
to carry out auto matching
for multiplayer games and
a lot of other services.
But so in this presentation,
I'm really just going to
focus on the essentials.
I'm going to start with authentication.
So we'll talk about player
registration and how you perform
the authentication within your game.
Then we'll go on to
talk about leaderboards,
so how you submit scores and display
your leaderboards to your users.
The same then with achievements,
how you define and submit achievement
data and how you display those.
And then there's a few other
pieces that I want to cover.
I want to talk about how
Game Center interacts
with iTunes Connect,
which is where you'll go to enable
Game Center and it's where you
define the metadata for your game.
And then also talk about
the Game Center Sandbox,
which is a test environment that you
can use before you release to make
sure that everything is working right.
But okay,
so let's start with authentication.
So the concept here is pretty simple.
Your players are going to sign
into a Game Center account,
either from the Game Center app or it can
be done from within your game as well.
And that account is what's
going to identify that player,
and that will be used
later in leaderboards,
in achievements, in friend requests,
or if your game is multiplayer
and if it uses voice chat.
So all Game Center games will
start by authenticating the player,
and we actually handle that whole
process for you automatically.
There's a couple of different
scenarios that could come up.
Normally, it may just be that this is a
returning player who's signed
into Game Center before,
and in that case, when you authenticate,
we just pop up a little
welcome back dialogue,
which goes away and then the
player is straight into your game.
Another possibility is that perhaps
this is the first time they've ever
signed into a Game Center game.
Well, if that's the case,
then we'll bring up
this sign-in dialogue,
where they can either sign in
with an existing account or create
a new account or cancel out.
Now,
if they sign in with an existing account,
then they'll be just
straight into your game.
But if they haven't
created an account yet,
then actually we will just bring up
the entire creation process for you.
All of this is handled
totally automatically.
You don't have to do
any extra work for this.
And then once they've created an account,
they'll be straight on
into your game again.
And so the third possibility is...
Perhaps when this dialogue came up,
they may have chosen to cancel out.
And usually if they cancel,
they'll just be straight into your game.
But actually, if they cancel three times,
then we will disable
Game Center for them,
so that they won't be asked
to sign in anymore after that.
They'll have considered
to have been opted out.
But then, once they've done that,
they'll be straight into your game again.
All right,
so let's look at authentication
from the development perspective.
I want to cover the steps
to perform authentication.
I'll talk about how to handle
errors and how authentication
interacts with multitasking.
And then I'll have a couple of
recommended practices for you to follow.
So the steps are actually very,
very simple.
There's really three
stages that we go through.
First is that we'll check for
Game Center support because there's
some devices or some OS releases that
of course don't support Game Center.
So we'll want to check for that first.
Then we'll request authentication
using the GK local player object,
which you see over here on the right.
All of authentication and
all of Game Center really is
centered around this object.
This is where the player ID,
the player's nickname,
and their friends list comes from.
And it's how you can tell if
they're underage and if they've
authenticated yet or not.
So once we have requested
the authentication,
then we'll check the result.
And based on that,
either enable or disable the
use of Game Center for the
rest of this run of the app.
So let's look at an example.
So here, first,
what I'm going to do is check
for the presence of some of
the GK local player APIs.
So I use NSClass from String and
just see if it exists or not.
Of course, if I were running on iOS 4.0,
this would come back null.
And so I would be able to
know to disable the use of
Game Center if that were the case.
Next, also here,
I'm checking if the device
is running iOS 4.1 or later.
So checking the device version
and comparing it to 4.1.
Now the reason for this is
actually because we released
a version of Game Center,
a preview version of Game Center to
developers that ran on iOS 4.0.
And we have to make sure that that
isn't the version that's being
run here because it's no longer
compatible with the online service.
the device has to be
running iOS 4.1 or above.
But so,
assuming both of those tests pass,
now I can go on and actually
request the authentication.
So here I get a handle to
the GKE local player object.
And here I'm calling local player
authenticate with completion handler.
And as an argument,
I'm passing it a block.
Now, I'll explain blocks
in just a few moments,
but the result that's going to come back
from this is going to tell us whether
the player is authenticated or not.
And it will fill in the fields
of the local player object.
So here I'm just checking if the
local player is authenticated,
then it's successful and I can go on
into my game using Game Center features.
Otherwise,
I still want to go into the game,
but I just don't want to
use Game Center features.
So I will disable posting scores
to Game Center leaderboards.
I won't try to query
achievements and so on.
And just to continue with that thought,
handling errors is really important
for you with the authentication process
because it just might not be successful.
There's a couple of cases.
There's three of them
that I've listed here.
One possibility is that perhaps you've
made a mistake and that you haven't yet
enabled Game Center in iTunes Connect.
Well, in that case,
the authentication will give
you back an error saying that
the game is not recognized.
Another possibility is that perhaps your
device does not support Game Center,
and specifically the iPhone 3G
does not have Game Center support.
So on that device,
when you attempt to authenticate,
you'll just get an error back
saying GK error not supported.
And then third, as I said,
perhaps the user has opted out.
Well, if that's the case,
then you'll just get an error
back that they've canceled,
and you should proceed accordingly.
And really, in all three of these cases,
the intention is that you should
still provide a graceful fallback
and proceed into the game,
but just disable the
Game Center features.
All right,
so let's talk about how authentication
interacts with multitasking.
And the thing to keep in mind is that
your authentication might not survive a
trip of the app going into the background
or being suspended and then coming back.
So anytime that that happens,
you actually have to re-authenticate.
And that's going to occur
automatically in iOS 4.2 and above.
But if you're running iOS 4.1,
you have to start the
authentication process over again.
Now, another thing to keep in mind is
that the player ID may have changed.
Perhaps, actually,
that might be the reason why
your application was suspended.
The player might have suspended your app,
gone to the Game Center app,
and signed in as a new player,
and then come back to your game.
Well, you have to handle that.
And if that occurs, really,
you should just start a new game.
But in either case,
if you come back into the
game after being suspended and
you're unable to authenticate,
well,
just proceed with a graceful fallback.
Just keep going with the game,
but with your
Game Center features disabled.
Thank you.
Now, the last thing is just a tip.
Something that we really think that you
should avoid is using extra dialogues
to customize the authentication process.
Like I see a number of games that
are doing something like this,
where they're saying, "Hey,
do you want to enable Game Center?"
and they make the user say yes or no.
Then if they say yes, then we go into the
authentication process.
This is really something to avoid.
We think that this creates
a lot of confusion.
And it's because this is
either redundant or incorrect,
depending on what the user
has already done in the past.
So they may have already authenticated.
And if so,
then you don't need to ask them
whether or not to enable Game Center.
The authentication process is
just going to sign them in.
Or they may have already
chosen to opt out,
and you're just bothering them
again with a new question.
And what if they were to say yes?
Well, Game Center has already
been disabled system-wide.
And so even if you say yes,
it's not going to take them into it.
They have to go into the
Game Center app to re-enable it.
So don't do this.
Instead, just think of Game Center as a
system-wide service that isn't intended
to have all of this custom enable and
disable behavior on a per-game basis.
But okay.
Now, before we proceed into
leaderboards and achievements,
I want to talk about just a few
fundamental concepts that are
going to help you understand
the use of the GameKit API.
And the first of these is iTunes
Connect and its interaction
with the Game Center service.
So a lot of game developers maybe
only use iTunes Connect when
they've finished with their game.
They've done all of the coding,
and now it's just time to upload
the game to the App Store.
So that's not how it
works with Game Center.
You actually need to go into
iTunes Connect up front to enable
Game Center for the app and to set
up all of the metadata for your
leaderboards and for your achievements.
And once you've released multiple
versions to also specify the
compatibility between different versions
of your game if you support multiplayer.
So that's one important
fundamental to keep in mind.
So the second thing is that you should
really program this API asynchronously.
So all of the API is designed
to send messages to the
Game Center service and then receive
back responses asynchronously.
And all of that is implemented
using blocks as callbacks,
or we call these completion
handlers in the API.
So here's an example.
When your game starts out and
it's going to send a message to
the Game Center service asking
it to authenticate the player,
that message gets sent,
and then the Game Center service
is going to respond back,
and the response will be received
by your completion handler.
So this is something that we
use all over in the GameKit API.
So in this case here,
I have some other object that's
going to perform some action,
send that request to
the Game Center service,
and then I'll receive a response
back in my completion handler.
So here I invoke object,
do some action with completion handler,
and here's the block
that's going to be invoked.
Now it's being passed back in NSAir,
and this is in common with
most of the Game Center APIs,
that if we receive an error,
then we'll go off and handle it.
Otherwise, if there's no error,
then it generally means that
that action was completed.
And then the third fundamental
that I just want to mention
is the Game Center sandbox.
So this is a pre-release test
environment that you can use during
your development to test your
game's interaction with Game Center.
So this is going to duplicate
the functionality of the
live Game Center service.
You'll have the same
iTunes Connect metadata,
meaning you'll have the same
achievements and leaderboard set up,
but it's a different Game Center server,
so the data in those achievement
lists or the data in that
leaderboard will be independent.
And there's also separate accounts,
so just accounts for you and
your beta testers to use.
So which environment are
you using at any given time?
Well,
just the rule of thumb to understand
is that any game that is in development
is going to be using the sandbox.
So that's your development builds,
any builds that are done
using the simulator,
or any ad hoc builds that you
distribute to your beta testers.
And once a game goes live and your users
are downloading it from the App Store,
well,
then that version of the game is going
to be using the production system.
So that's the production server.
Okay, so now let's talk about accounts.
Just bear in mind that you have separate
accounts between the sandbox environment
and your production environment.
Now, you could use the same login and
password between both of these.
I do that.
But a tip is if you are using
the same login and password,
it can sometimes get confusing as to
which environment you're actually in.
So choose different nicknames
because that's what the
Game Center app will display to you,
and that's also what's displayed
in the "Welcome Back" dialog.
So just for example,
if I was Apollo in production,
maybe I should change my name
to be Apollo Sandbox when I'm
in the sandbox environment,
just so I can keep them straight.
Now, a note about switching back and
forth between sandbox and production.
If you want to go to the sandbox,
you're currently in production.
All you have to do is run any game
that's going to use the sandbox,
run any game that's still in development.
You'll be prompted to enter
your sandbox login and password,
and then you'll be
straight into the game.
But if you're currently in the
sandbox and you want to get
out of it and go to production,
then there's a process
you have to go through.
You need to go to the Game Center app
and tap the account ribbon,
and it'll bring up a
dialog to let you sign out.
And then after you've signed out,
still within the Game Center app,
enter your production login and password,
and then sign back in again.
And now you'll be back into
the production environment.
With that done, let's change gears and
talk about... Leaderboards.
And the concepts of
leaderboards are very simple.
This is a list of all of
your players' best scores.
You define how scoring
is done in your game.
So it can be the most points,
or the best time, or the highest level.
It can be sorted up or down.
And what leaderboards really do
is increase the player engagement
and encourage more competition
between players in your game.
Everybody wants to look at the
scores that they're scoring.
So you can look at the scores that
your friends have achieved and scores
that are at the top of the leaderboard
and see if they can beat those.
So now let's look at a couple of
features of our leaderboard API.
You can either use our standard built-in
interface or present your own custom UI.
We also provide filters either by time,
today, this week, or all time,
or by audience.
So you can look at just the
leaderboard entries from your friends,
or you can see all the
players in the game.
There's a variety of different score
types and score formats that we support.
So your scores can be
ints or floats or times.
They can have a number of
decimal places and so on.
And we support up to 25 different
leaderboards in Game Center.
So you can have at the same time
a leaderboard for the best score,
but also maybe another one
that tracks the best time.
So let's look at leaderboards from
the perspective of the developer.
I'm going to talk about how you define
leaderboards and report a score.
Then we'll get into how to
present the leaderboards,
either with the built-in UI or
querying the data yourself and
presenting it in your own custom UI.
And at the end, I'll have a couple of
recommended practices.
So here's the data that
you'll need to define your
leaderboards in iTunes Connect.
We'll start out,
we'll give each leaderboard a name
and an ID that we'll use in the code
anytime we want to send data to this
leaderboard or query its values.
Then there's a number of
different pieces of metadata.
So here you set the score type.
So here I've chosen integers.
Also the sort order for the
scores in this leaderboard,
either ascending or descending.
Here I've chosen descending.
And then a series of fields which
are localizable for the language,
the display name, the score format,
and a suffix.
So here I've just chosen English.
When this is displayed,
it's going to call this
leaderboard top scores,
and scores will be presented
using the American standard
for presenting large numbers.
Then the suffix, singular,
is going to be point,
and plural will be points.
But these last few fields
can also be localized.
So here I have German,
we support simplified Chinese, and so on.
Now,
all of this data gets defined in iTunes
Connect and just lives up in the cloud,
and your application then uses
it when it's using Game Center by
indexing it through that ID.
Now,
a couple of tips as you define that data.
The first has to do with the sort order.
So we see a number of developers
making this mistake from time to time.
So a descending leaderboard is one
that has the highest scores at the top,
and then as you go down the ranks,
the scores are decreasing.
So that's appropriate for
like a high scoreboard.
An ascending leaderboard has
the lowest scores at the top,
and so that's appropriate for a
leaderboard that wants to show,
for example, the shortest amount of time,
the lowest score.
And the other tip has to do with the
suffix that's going to be displayed.
Just note that we don't add
any leading space between this,
so that when it's presented to the user,
if you want a space between
the number and the suffix,
you need to add it yourself.
Okay, so now let's talk about
reporting a score.
There's really three steps
that we're gonna do here.
The first is that we create a
GK score object and initialize
it and set the value.
Then we'll report that score to
Game Center and then we finally check
for errors and handle those if necessary.
And all of this is gonna be centered
around this GK score object that
you see here on the right hand side.
You set the category,
that's gonna be the ID of the
leaderboard that you wanna submit it to,
and the value.
And then once you've done that,
you can report that score to Game Center.
So here's an example of that.
Here I'm creating a GK score
object and initializing it with the
ID of the leaderboard that I was
just showing you a moment ago.
Here I set its value.
The value is a 64-bit integer,
so here I'm just setting
it to some value,
to some score.
And I then report that score to
Game Center and give it and pass along
with it a completion handler that'll
be called when I get a response back.
The completion handler will
be called and passed in NSERR.
And if there is one,
then we'll save the score for later.
I'll talk about that in just a moment.
But otherwise, if there's no error,
then we know that this score was
submitted successfully and it should
now show up on the leaderboard
if it's the player's best score.
So now let's talk about that
case where an error might happen.
It's really vital that you
handle any errors that occur
during score submission.
And it can happen for a
variety of different reasons.
There might be a networking
failure so that the score
wasn't received by Game Center.
Or maybe there's some kind of a mistake.
The player hasn't been authenticated
or the score wasn't set.
Now, in all of those cases,
you need to handle that error.
But let's look a little more closely
at the communications failure case.
What you really should do then is to
save the score and resubmit it later.
Perhaps the next time your
application starts up,
you have a connection
on that later attempt.
And something that makes this really
easy is the fact that the GK score
object conforms to the NSCoding protocol.
So it's really simple for you
to just take a score and archive
it away and then bring that back
the next time you run your app.
But one thing to keep in mind with
that is how to limit cheating.
So cheating could occur if somebody
modifies your saved scores file.
And then the next time you run your app,
you unpack that and just
submit it back to Game Center.
So you should take some
steps to try to limit that.
A few options that you might
explore are adding a checksum into
the file or a hash to the score.
Or also now,
Game Center will limit score submissions
to known valid amounts if you enter
that data into iTunes Connect.
You can say something like,
"No score greater than 100,000
is valid." And any score
submissions that you submit,
score submissions higher than
that will just be dropped.
Okay, so now let's move on to how
to display leaderboards.
And I'll start with displaying
them using the standard UI.
So this is actually really simple.
We have a built-in class called
the GK Leaderboard View Controller.
You see it over here
on the right-hand side.
So all you have to do is create one of
these objects and set its properties.
You tell it which leaderboard
you want to display.
You tell it the time scope
that you want to see,
either today, this week, or all time.
And you set a delegate for
when it gets dismissed.
And then you present this modally
using your root view controller.
Okay, so here I'm creating a view
controller object and initializing it.
And I set the category to the same
leaderboard that I showed you earlier.
I set its time scope, in this case,
to all time,
and set the delegate to myself.
Now I present that modal view controller.
And then it's going to come up and
display the leaderboards to the user,
and there'll be a button to dismiss it.
And once the user presses that button,
this delegate is going to fire of
leaderboard view controller did finish,
and that's where I can
dismiss the view controller.
Okay, so that's all there is to it
for displaying leaderboards
using the standard UI.
Now, if you want to display leaderboards
using your own custom UI,
then you need to query the
data out of them yourself.
And we provide you the
functionality to do that.
You can query data from
Game Center programmatically.
So some typical queries that
you might do for this are,
for example, the top 10 scores,
or you might query, say,
ranks N through N plus 20
on the current leaderboard.
Or you might.
As for the ranks for a
certain list of player IDs.
Now, in each of those cases,
you'll submit a query to Game Center,
and the results are going to be
returned to you asynchronously
in a completion handler.
There are a few expectations
that we have about this.
We expect that you're going to
query a relatively small range
and with relatively low frequency.
Something you should not try to do
is query your entire leaderboard.
For one thing, it could be huge,
and that would be a very poor game.
And that would be a very poor game.
user experience.
[Transcript missing]
The second thing is to support archiving.
So in case of any error,
you really need to check for
the error and then save the
scores for later resubmission,
perhaps when your application
starts back up again.
[Transcript missing]
We also have the idea of partial
progress for achievements from 0%
to 100%. And this is really useful
for achievements like the one
where you've defeated 50 enemies
or things along those lines,
where you can show the player just
the kind of progress that they have
made towards earning that achievement.
We also have support
for hidden achievements,
so that you can have certain achievements
that only reveal themselves when you
decide to reveal them to the player.
And this is something that you can
either use for hidden secret rewards,
or maybe you just have in-app purchases,
for example,
that unlock new levels in your game,
and you have achievements
associated with those levels.
You might only want those achievements
to become visible if the user has
made that particular purchase.
And then finally,
achievements in Game Center earn
the player a number of points.
And I'll get into that in just
a little bit more detail here.
So as I say, the player earns points for
completing an achievement.
They get from 1 to 100
points for each achievement.
And of course,
you control the design of this.
So more difficult achievements
in your game should generally
earn the player more points.
You have a maximum budget of 1,000
points total for your entire game.
So be sure to leave headroom for
future expansion of your title,
just in case at some point you
want to add more achievements
and have more points.
You need to make sure that there's
still some available for that.
Or perhaps you might add new levels or,
again,
you might get feedback from your users
with new ideas for new achievements and
you want to be sure that you have the
headroom available to still add those.
All right,
so let's get into achievements now from
the point of view of the development.
So first I'll talk about how you
define achievements in your game,
then how you can report achievement
progress and display that to the user,
and then finally how you can
programmatically query the
achievement progress and present
that in a custom display.
And then finally at the end,
some recommended practices.
So just like with leaderboards,
there's some things you'll need
to define in iTunes Connect.
So here's an example of that here.
You'll give each achievement
a name and an ID.
The ID is what you'll use in the
API to reference this achievement.
You tell us whether or not
the achievement is hidden.
Most of the time they're not.
You give the achievement a point value,
and then some localized
fields per locale.
So here I've given it
the title Master Warrior,
and you earn this achievement
if you defeat 50 enemies.
And the description of it after
you've earned that achievement
is defeated 50 enemies.
And you'll also see this image show up.
Now you take all of that and
enter it into iTunes Connect,
just like with leaderboards,
and that lives up in the cloud and
is then accessed by your application.
[Transcript missing]
Now, to display achievements to the user,
we either have the standard UI or you
can query achievements programmatically.
So let's look at the standard UI first.
And this is going to be, again,
exactly the same thing as
you saw with leaderboards,
but now using the
achievement view controller.
So here it's very simple.
You just create a
GKEachievementViewController object,
you set its delegate for dismissal,
and then you'll present this modally
on your root view controller.
So here's the code for that.
So the first thing I'm doing here,
I'm creating that
achievements view controller,
I set that delegate,
and then I present it modally.
And then when the user presses done,
this delegate method is going to
fire of achievementsDidPressDismiss.
And that's where I can
dismiss that view controller.
So that's very, very, very simple.
All right,
next let's talk about how you can query
achievement data from Game Center.
There's really two common cases
where you might want to do this.
The first is that when
your game starts up,
you probably want to query
Game Center to load all of that
player's current achievement progress.
They may have switched devices,
or this might be a new player and
you just haven't seen them before,
where you should query that
data from Game Center to see
if they've already made any
progress through your application.
The second case is if you just want to
present a custom achievements display.
You're going to need to get all of the
achievement data out of Game Center so
that you can present that to the user.
And for both of those,
there's two classes that are
involved that are going to
give you arrays of data back.
And so the first is the
GK achievement class,
which is what you just saw
for reporting an achievement.
You can also query Game Center for
the list of all of the achievement
progress that this player has made.
And it's going to come back as
an array of GK achievements.
So you can see here,
each achievement has an identifier,
a percent complete.
It'll tell you whether or
not it's been completed,
whether it's hidden.
And then if this is a query,
it'll also give you back the date
that it was reported to Game Center.
But so that's all of the
achievements for the current player.
You also,
if you're going to present a list of
all of the achievements in your game,
you can also use the
GK achievement description array.
And that's the objects on
the right-hand side here,
which is the GK achievement
description array.
So this is an array corresponding to all
of the data that you've defined in iTunes
Connect for all of your achievements.
So each of these now
will have an identifier,
a title, the description before and
after the achievement is earned,
the number of points that
that achievement has value of,
and whether it's hidden and its image.
array of those,
you can present a big list of all
of the achievements in your game.
[Transcript missing]
Now, after startup,
that's a great place for you to load
all of the player's latest achievement
progress in case they had previously
played your game on another device.
Also, it's a good time for you,
if you had any achievements that
previously had failed submissions,
that's a good time now to
resubmit them to Game Center.
And then during gameplay,
there's some things you should do.
Really only report achievement
progress to Game Center if it changes.
You don't need to go back
and re-report the same
achievements over and over again.
And then just like with leaderboards,
you should always check for errors when
you're submitting the achievements.
And if there is one,
save it to be resubmitted later.
All right,
so I've covered a lot of ground here.
I've gone into detail about
player authentication,
submitting scores and
displaying leaderboards,
and how to define, submit,
and display achievements.
And I also discussed how the
Game Center service interacts with
iTunes Connect and the Sandbox.
But really,
that's just scratching the surface.
I didn't cover multiplayer or voice chat,
and Game Center also has some great
features for interacting with friends.
So if you have questions
about those things,
or any of the content
that I've presented here,
here's my contact information.
And we also have some great documentation
available in the iOS Dev Center,
and you can come talk to us in
the developer forums as well.
So I hope to see you in Game Center.
Thanks for watching.